on this special weekend as we celebrate
Her Majesty's official birthday we
remember that the regiment's of Foot
Guards on parade are very much
the Queen's personal troops and that
this the Magnificent Guards Chapel in
central London is their spiritual home
where so many of the regimental colors
are kept this year it's the turn of the
Grenadier Guards to troop their color at
the most spectacular military display of
the year the Queen's Birthday parade
[Music]
and this parade takes place in a year of
notable anniversaries earlier this week
we marked the 75th anniversary of the
Normandy landings on d-day and today
given the provenance of the Grenadier
Guards it's fitting to note that one of
the most distinguished of their former
Colonels the Duke of Wellington was born
250 years ago so the Grenadier Guards
are providing today's escort their
current Colonel is the Duke of York the
little later we'll be talking to him
about his involvement with the regiment
and his thoughts on taking part in the
parade in around 15 minutes time the
Duke will be riding from the palace with
other members of the royal family
accompanying Her Majesty the Queen as
they make their way to Horse Guards for
the ceremony of trooping the colour and
lining the mouth
we have 14 officers and a hundred and
seventy men of the Welsh Guards who this
time last year we're serving in
Afghanistan eagerly waiting understands
at Horse Guards around 7,000 people
among them friends and families of those
on parade as well as some lucky members
of the public who were successful in the
balance
for tickets we're here on BBC one for
the entire parade as ever and the great
fly passed by the Royal Air Force but
there's also uninterrupted coverage on
the red button and this year we are
streaming live around the world for the
first time on YouTube now it's nine
years since the first Battalion
Grenadier Guards last provided the
escort and so many of the families in
the stands will be watching for the
first time and my colleague Sonali Shah
is with some of them Hugh I'm surrounded
by a heady mix of excitement to nerves
because this is where the heart of
today's support is and I'm with the
family of today's regimental sergeant
major Sam Brooks Vanessa is his wife you
look like you're bursting with pride if
a little nervous yes really nervous
we're very excited how will Sam be
feeling right about now
I think he's gonna be really excited
he'll really want to get a good job done
and this is the pinnacle of his career
so it's also his last day in the role so
kids any message for Dad yes that's sir
Sonali with some of the very proud
relatives here today and with me as
someone who's experienced this parade in
several roles over the years he is left
hanging Colonel Vince gaunt a man with
decades of service with the Grenadier
Guards Vince are very good morning to
you thank you great you should pledge to
be here well it's nice to have you with
us let me show you 2001 and take you
back to that memorably went parade when
you were the regimental start major that
must be memorable I'm glad to say you
haven't brought that weather back with
you today
yeah I mean there's a number of things
that I've been in charge you never the
weather so yeah I think we'll get away
with it to know that it looks well
potentially quite sunny so let's hope it
stays that way now what are you looking
forward to well I'm looking forward to
after all the hard work that all the
regiment's especially the Grenadier
Guards are putting in beings out there
truth all my sort of friends people have
served with and their families to have a
great day in front of their majesty
looking forward to events thank you for
being with us it's always important to
remind everyone that away from the
ceremonial duties the troops we see
today are frontline soldiers they have a
dual role and to underline that the
Grenadier have adopted the saying twice
the man that dual role is perfectly
illustrated by their presence on the
parade ground today having recently
returned from deployments abroad
zero this is 1 0 Delta Radio check over
normally when you think of a guardsman
you think of the fellow in the red tunic
and the bearskin hat which is me however
I'm also the fellow sigh here were my
buddy Amon my helmet doing a very
different job to what I do when I'm on
Queens God at men we have people
deployed in Iraq South Sudan here in
Afghanistan we'll be back together in
March getting ready for her Majesty's
birthday parade in June the role that we
are performing out here is reporting
force protection for the mentors who
helped to train the Afghan National Army
our purpose out here in South Sudan is
to provide engineering support to the UN
mission the environment that we operate
it is pretty austere the temperatures
are very hot it's very humid and the
glutes work pretty hard to deliver the
security that we need to enable the
force to operate I'm the senior major of
the Grenadier Guards and we're here in
Iraq to assist the Iraqis in developing
their security forces so they can have a
secure and stable future today we've
been teaching mortal essence for the
16-millimeter more that is done by our
lunch sergeants wife's I stand it and
just watch over
[Music]
we've been awarded our medals by the
colonel of the regiment the jeep of York
himself which is a very rare and special
occasion having been away on an
operational tour for the last year I
would like to pay my debt of gratitude
and thanks to all of you for the work
that you have done so successfully the
whole battalion has been on tour in
different places around the world so
right now we're just talking a good time
after what's been a quite a busy year
for us and I'm pleased to say the
commanding officer of the Grenadier
today's field officer in Brigade
awaiting leftenant Colonel Pitt ash
field is here with me we've just seen
the Grenadier zon operational duty how
tough is that switch to today's
ceremonial role I think actually it's a
remarkable easy because many of the same
things we look for operations
self-discipline
you know commitment what's required on
the parade you know not least rehearsing
preparation and as we see here this is
Empress the horse I'll be riding a
little bit later having a breakfast
before she gets settled up and the tack
put on her ready for today's parade so
she's nearly ready what are you most
looking forward to
are there any tricky bits probably the
hardest bit is the rain back on Empress
where we make the horse walk backwards
and a horse doesn't naturally walk
backwards as you might imagine so that's
needed quite a lot of preparation and a
massive thanks must go to court major
skulls and the house under vision
stables for all the preparation they've
put in to get us to this stage well the
very best of luck with today's parade
thank you very much Colonel Ashford I
was the lieutenant-colonel piers
Asheville today's commanding officer
talking to sonali and these are the
guards that he'll be commanding on
parade so let's take a closer look at
them now
first Battalion guarantee regards
providing the escort as we know as well
as numbers two and four guards Wyler
number three yard is provided by
Nijmegen company representing the second
Battalion Grenadier Guards then if we
move along F company Scots Guards
providing number five guard and last
year twelve members of the company took
part in the long walk home they marched
100 miles from the Menin gates to the
Cenotaph for the centenary of the end of
the Great War I'm taking a look at the
far end of the parade ground formed up
at right angles we have number six guard
provided by the Coldstream Guards and it
was the first Battalion coastal guards
who provided the escort in last year's
parade and the word about the Irish
Guards well they are currently busy
preparing to deploy to Iraq and South
Sudan but they are represented today by
the regimental band of course and by the
colonel of the regiment the Duke of
Cambridge will be riding to the parade a
little later and the immaculate uniform
of the guards is of course recognized
around the world and the men take
immense pride in their appearance and to
understand the work that goes into the
uniform and the pride with which it is
worn we paid a visit to the grandi as
master tailor and the team as they
prepared for this year's parade
[Music]
everybody knows that you're going to be
able to say you are one who instantly
fills with pride rather than being in
the army and being a soldier you are
going to do it it's just that the minute
you say you're a Grenadier your eyes
lift a little bit more people to feel a
little bit different especially first
time they put on a tunic you can see
what it means to be a good idea that
attention to detail and the intricacies
of making the tunic that Sun's up a
Grenadier perfectly the precision and
accuracy and the detail is required
seeing is a testament to how seriously
we take our old look at the new guys and
seen the look on their faces when they
get in fear and that reminds of myself
all those years ago when it was me a
great sense of pride of wearing the
tunic and the basket that was the first
time I'm at the master tailor yeah third
week on the job so I'm I'm brand new
everyone knows about what the granite is
do because there's such a sort of
important icon for the British Army say
yeah it's enormous ly exciting to to get
mine sorted
[Music]
the amount of work that goes into it is
phenomenal we work on average anywhere
between this or fifteen to an 18 hour a
day plus the guys coming back off tall
they've robbed have put on a stone and a
half in muscle or they've lost hunting
mountain bits away I haven't changed
he's just gotten skinning yeah yeah you
keep telling yourself that it's helpful
battalions 500-plus
and that is fitting out to lots of
tunics to lots of tweets they have to
have metal loops you have to put rank on
them every day there just seems to be
more people need to have a sense of
humor especially at this time of year
it's a lot of early starts getting back
after a long day the boots can take an
hour hour and a half that can sometimes
be quite tedious if I'm honest the
Grenadier is a massive family and that
probably doesn't really home into a day
at a troop where you just look around
and there's just 600 of you all in the
tunic and the bearskin comes down and
you know now it's the time to shine back
on Horse Guards Sun is peeping through
the clouds little light rain earlier but
it's dried up nicely now perfect
conditions for this year's parade and
that sharp look with uniformed nowhere
more evident on parade than with the
color party let's look at them because
they are protecting the color that will
soon be trooped through the ranks to
color sentries Guardsman McKenzie Healy
and Guardsman Garrett and then the
sergeant of the color party is Sergeant
Mark Wilson who deployed to Afghanistan
last year very prominent role for them
today and indeed a proud moment for all
of these men and the families watching
understands and at home
the officers taking post on Horse Guards
Parade as we prepare for the first of
the Royal processions to come from
Buckingham Palace very smartly marching
across to their individual guards if we
look down the mal a great processional
route first processions about to leave
[Music]
national anthem being played signaling
the departure of the first three royal
carriages from Buckingham Palace making
their way to Horse Guards Parade and in
the first carriage we have the Duke and
Duchess of Sussex we have the Duchess of
Cornwall and the Duchess of Cambridge
and Harry and Megan having recently both
celebrated their first wedding
anniversary and indeed the birth of
their first child Archie
reaching the crowds in lovely sunshine
the Duke of Kent Colonel of the Scots
Guards and the Earl and Countess of
Wessex
we have Princess Beatrice and Eugenie
the daughters of the Duke of York
glorious view along the MAL down towards
Admiralty Arch past the Queen Victoria
Memorial Beatrice and Eugenie and of
course was to royal weddings last year
not one because at the daughter of the
Duke of York marrying jack Brooksbank
who is also in today's possession in the
college
and already as you can see thousands of
people lining Green Park and st. James's
Park ready to enjoy this great spectacle
as Her Majesty the Queen prepares to
leave Buckingham Palace for this year's
birthday drink
[Music]
the Royal salutes our unsounded by the
field officers trumpeter of the
sovereigns escort trooper Daniel Stokes
of the Life Guards as a match to the
Queen makes away towards Horse Guards in
the Scottish state coach this year a
majesty who celebrated her 93rd birthday
in April attending her 67th birthday
parade as sovereign a record that is
completely unmatched by any other
British monarchy passing the Great
Canada gate on the fringe of green park
crowds enjoying this great scene in the
sunshine here
[Applause]
Queen who first rode in the birthday
parade back in 1947 in her role then as
Colonel of the Grenadier Guards a role
which later passed on to the Duke of
Edinburgh who is not taking part in
today's parade having stepped down from
his royal duties in 2017 and a thought
for the Duke because on Monday he will
be celebrating his 98th birthday and we
should mention the Royal Colonels who
are in this procession to following the
Queen's carriage because the Royal
Colonels include the Duke of York it's
his second time riding as Colonel of the
Grenadier Guards having succeeded his
father a proud occasion for him as his
regiment of course is providing the
escort today and he's riding Darby Darby
was a gift to the Queen from Canada
earlier this year the other royal
Colonels we have the Prince of Wales
Colonel of the Welsh Guards a role he
took over from his father on st. David's
Day in 1975 the Duke of Cambridge riding
in his ninth parade as Colonel of the
Irish Guards and at the far end there we
concede the Princess Royal probably the
most skilled equestrian of the quartet I
think it's fair to say hurdle of the
Blues and Royals a position she's held
for over 20 years
[Music]
so the Queen's procession well on its
way that mile or so along the mouth to
postcard parade
and approaching the parade ground we
have the first three royal carriages
there's been a change of formation to
greet the carriages number three guard
has opened up to allow access to these
first three carriages as they cross the
parade ground the national anthem will
be played
[Music]
coachmen having saluted the color and
Prince Harry saluting the color as he
passes the very ground towards the
office once occupied by the Duke of
Wellington because that is where he
members the raw party will be watching
today's parade it's a great vantage
point the office currently occupied by
Major General Ben Bathurst the the
gentleman commanding the household
division of the British Army and General
Officer Commanding London District but
today his office is being used by the
Royal guests and Vince the Royal party
will be met by a Guardsman and you've
previously fulfilled that role I'm just
wondering what the day is like and what
those duties are well they took me to a
very privileged position of being and I
add that I had that privilege as a
garrison commander and what the job was
I would meet all of the extended family
and members of the immediate family and
then take them upstairs heavily mop
stairs and then you know show them into
the office and it's in the atmosphere
it's easy electrically like they here to
celebrate as we all are how much they
supposedly would they protect you with
questions lots of questions very
inquisitive you know they they would
want to know that the younger members
who want to know if they've been to
school with any of the end of the people
on the parade where they stood what
God's will want although they've got a
program even though the the older
members of the family they would they
would also ask question if something has
changed and I would be there to sort of
fill those questions before they all got
ready to jockey into position and make
sure they've got a good position in the
window - what's a bright I was about to
ask is some competition for the best
viewpoints certainly is yeah well
they're going to enjoy the parade and
we'll enjoy the parade as well leading
the sovereigns escort along the mall is
the brigade major then Colonel guy's
stone who began his career with Welsh
Guards and it's his responsibility now
to ensure that the procession runs like
clockwork and this is his second year in
the role he spoke to us a little earlier
the brigade major principally is in
control of all the timings all the
coordination as I'm leading khamoshi
down the mail I'm getting a constant
feed of information to make sure that
I'm at the right place at the right time
I would be lying if I said it wasn't
nerve-racking it's pretty daunting but
we've been doing this for a long time so
we know exactly how long it takes it
requires great concentration from the
soldiers making sure they're fully
committed to what they're doing and if
they put their minds to it then we'll be
okay
the Year brigade major riding sovereign
shadow and directly behind him for
troopers of the Life Guards including
their first ever female soldier trooper
Nina croaker and alongside her troopers
mackenzie martins and dell and they're
followed i think it's fair to say by one
of the highlights of the parade for many
people the glorious sight and sound of
the mounted band of the house of camo
it's a great sound great sight directed
by nature justin matthews who first took
part in the birthday parade a quarter of
a century ago as a mounted cattle
drummer this will be his last terrain as
he's retiring next year and it's nice to
enjoy some of the music
[Music]
the heart of the procession of course
the Queen's carriage preceded by the
first and second divisions of the
sovereigns escort and that's a segment
provided this year by the Life Guards
and their distinctive red tunics and
their white plumes and as we look at the
plumes by the way the helmet design was
completed by Prince Albert back in 1852
so the first and second divisions
provided by the lifeguards and there we
have the third and fourth divisions of
the sovereigns escort provided this year
by the Blues and Royals in their
glorious Navy tunics and red plumes and
this tradition of inviting the house of
cavalry to score the sovereign to the
parade was introduced by King George six
back in 1937 to add to the spectacle to
add to the grandeur of the event the
Vinson you've taken part in I think
seven birthday parades and I'm just
wondering at this point did you ride in
any of them I know there was a the
previous Major General did sort of joke
with me a few times
a little too seriously they only tried
to get me to ride and you know I always
managed to be elsewhere into the fort
Dorian or sick of it
no regrets not at all no I'm not made to
sit on an awesome I went in for Jimmy
well we can look and admire that country
we go
trooping the colour course organized to
mark the sovereigns official birthday
tradition that started with george ii
whose birthday was in november and to
move the ceremony to the summer in the
hope of good weather that modern
tradition of doing so started with
edward the south
we mentioned the four royal Colonels
there are two non royal Colonels also an
important part of today's procession to
Oscar Hut's colonel of the Coldstream
Guards Lieutenant General Sir James
Buckner he comes from a very impressive
military family his brother and father
were also called streamers
he's on parade today with his two sons
by the way and he's carrying the sort
that his grandfather used in the First
World War and the other non royal
colonel is the colonel of the lifeguards
Major General Sir Edward Smith Osborne
newly appointed Colonel of the
lifeguards he's been commanding officer
to both Princes William and Harry and
indeed Harry served under him in
Afghanistan
good moment as we look at the MAL and
the magnificent display of union flags
to say that the sovereigns birthday is
also marked in several other ways the
union flag sir flying along the MAL and
indeed on government buildings there's a
41 gun salute by the Kings troops in
green park a little later as well as the
impressive flight passed by the Royal
Air Force as we have the publication as
well of the Birthday Honours List we'll
have something to say about that
a little later on and for the birthday
parade the flags of all 53 countries
currently in the Commonwealth are flown
along Horse Guards Road and the flags
are flown in the order that their
countries joined the Commonwealth
starting with the Union Flag and then we
see a finishing the flag of Rwanda which
is on the northern side of the guards
memorial Queen enjoying the views and
the crowds and so nice to have a
contingent of Chelsea pensioners with us
today enjoying this spectacle
proudly standing to attention as Her
Majesty arrives on the parade ground
the Chelsea pensioners led today by
major Frankie Howell formerly of the
Irish Guards does the Queen's carriage
makes its way onto the parade ground we
will have the familiar sight of the head
coachman Matthew Powers
saluting the color with his whip
and that salute completed means that the
Queen's birthday parade of 2019 is about
to begin the field officer forgive his
command the anthem will be played and at
the stroke of eleven o'clock the royal
standard will be released
Oh
[Music]
No
well being Queens first task is to
inspect the line of six guards and of
course also an opportunity to hear the
music the mass bands the man in charge
is the senior director of music
lieutenant-colonel Darrin wolf and Dale
of the Irish Guards joined the army as a
clarinetist back in 1981 and the music
for the slow inspection is entrada
written by the american composer alpha
dream
[Music]
music changes to Queen Elizabeth's March
which was written for tweeners of a
Queen Mother
back in 1937 it's a good moment for us
to reflect on the fact that this is
quite an intensely personal moment for
the guards because they make direct eye
contact with the sovereign that's right
yeah we get the guys these are their
this their moment this is what they wear
they're here for their here in front of
the sovereign so just look as best they
can and as she goes past they'll have
that special moment where all the
guardsmen stops to look straight at her
and she looks back and she knows it's
looking for which a great moment for her
to program because the one thing you
can't touch is the Queen's expertise
core not sure now sure she knows exactly
what she's looking for and and they know
so you know that they're they don't bet
on the best it's the best I can be
Queens procession passing the sovereigns
standard of the Life Guards which
there's the regimental battle honours as
well as the Royal coat of arms the
standard bearer corporal major Daniels
Knoxville
[Music]
that procession will continue past the
Kings troop Royal Horse Artillery bonded
by major Harry Wallace the carriage
driver will salute the lead gun which is
in effect their regimental color
[Music]
in the procession we have major-general
Ben Bathurst who took command at the
hustle division two years ago was
commissioned into the Welsh Guards in
[Music]
now this is Lieutenant Colonel Darren
Wolfe on Dale's last year as senior
director of music and this year's
program does feature popular marches
some personalized selections and one
piece which it has to be said is
something of a rarity
I think what's unusual about this year
is that the composer is actually on the
parade at the time it's it's played the
March is entitled twice the man which is
inspired by the regimental recruiting
post or the ground guards this refers to
their dual role which is ceremonial and
operational and he's composed it
especially for this troop and it's a
really good piece of music it sits
really nicely in the parade having it
performed on such a a world stage is
something that most composers can only
dream of so it's it's an absolute gift
Bray's like this don't come around every
day of the week is definitely pinnacle
of anybody's career so after 38 years
I'm really pleased that this will be
where I finished my career so I'm a very
happy man yes it is unheard of for a
musician to compose a march and to
perform it on the day so we look forward
to hearing that new composition by Ian
twice the man in just a moment and let's
reflect on that phrase then Vince twice
the man where does it come from well as
you can see you know we are ceremonial
soldiers but we're forging soldiers
first you know we are there on
operations as you've seen through a
number of films so the operational side
is either is important and you know we
we sort of hang on that that is where
our life that is so we can change you
we've got a skill that we can change
from operations and change into
ceremonial troops yes that's very
shortened
is it difficult to combine your roles
they find that a challenge no not really
it'll depend on the individual but I've
got to admit you know it's it's a
seamless it's just you know you know
what you were joining so as you can see
today you know you you would want to go
through your whole career and not do
what we're doing to that a Majesty sir
has returned to the saluting base now
that the inspection is complete and the
masked bands are ready for their star
turn I think it's fair to say because
the parade is about to get underway with
a very popular March late you know this
year marks the 150th anniversary of this
arrangement
[Music]
what's Birds Weather Center
standing by for the trombone to be
raised by sergeant Andrew Mercer the
signal for the counter March for the
mass bounce
[Music]
from the old to the new of this is Lots
Argentine Chiapas composition twice the
man this is the piece making its debut
at the Queen's birthday drink
[Music]
there we have the lone drummer breaking
away Lance Corporal booth from the equal
drums marching to a position to the
right to the escort that's ready for the
next phase of the terrain
[Music]
drummer playing eight bars of the field
signal called the drummer's call
recalling an age when communications on
the battlefield to use the drums and we
have an orderly gauze burn via mommy
marching forward to take the pace stick
from regimental some major Sam Brooks
who can then sub Wilton of the escort
Captain Robert Lang giving the order for
members of the escort to take up their
dressing in close order a tighter
formation for the march forward to
collect the color in a few moments
that's good for the color by the left
brick
[Music]
yes quad stepping off with great energy
and flair to the rousing March of the
British grenadiers march forward hold
some 16 paces from the color party ready
for the collection to take place
[Music]
Vince we are now approaching a very big
moment for Sam Brooks when the eyes of
the world are upon him yeah I mean he's
the only one to be in a position like
this you know everything is about timing
but if you are the salt major of Foot
Guards regiment you know to do
operations and go on a play to saw major
but to do this job it's very very
special indeed and I'm shooting with
evil in relish every moment
[Music]
that's good for the cut up and down this
buds
[Music]
[Applause]
so regimental saw major Sam Brooks now
preparing to take possession of the
color protecting it with this sword
ready to hand it over safely to the
ensign second a tenant Robin Mackworth
young who will then troupe the color
through the ranks and this is what
they've been preparing for for weeks
isn't it Benson it is you know that the
whole the eyes of the nation is now he's
now on them and they would have
practiced this and you know today is the
danger getting on
second a tenant Robin Mac with young
today's n sigh safely receiving the
color placing it is white color belt
[Music]
I start to color
so the ensign and the regiment's our
major resumed their positions within the
escort and we've now entered a new phase
in this birthday parade the escort for
the color having taken possession of the
color has now become the escort to the
color
Oh God - tada
that's good too color Center so the
Esper advances in slow time the bands
play escort to the color by Richard
writhings and his sir tuners being
played at this point ever since 1978
very soon the band sir will have to
negotiate this rather daunting maneuver
we have 200 musicians supported by four
drums having to change direction without
changing formation his water is known as
the spit we watched very closely and
carefully by the royal guests in the
Duke of Wellington's old office of our
force guards and Vince in your many
different roles on the parade ground I
suppose you've seen the spin wheeler
very close quarters yes sir I mean as a
young guy with in number four guard he
would be in that corner and that
particular maneuver seems chaotic it
worked it to I out but there's a wall of
sound that hits you there not a feeling
like that
and of course you've got to maintain
your each steadiness and your ears open
to find out you know to make sure that
you don't miss anything on the right
it's difficult really isn't it to convey
the power and the majesty of the sound
the bands make yeah it literally is
something that hits you that that AK
sound just hits you and you know it does
it does take it just takes a bit of
getting used to on all the reason
[Music]
so the music changes as the escort makes
its way color and escort continuing
their slow march to the ranks the
ceremony the formal ceremony of the
trooping the colour gets underway
[Music]
grenadiers slow march arranged by Fred
Harris and the specific honor here is to
parade the regimental standard or the
color very hard to today's tonight
colour blazoned on the Burnaby is color
45 of their battle honours and those
honours also embossed on the officer
swords
[Music]
such a special moment for the insight
second of tenant Robin Mac with young
who told us earlier how he felt about
being accorded this on my ancestor
actually won the Victoria Cross in the
Crimean War whilst defending the color
so for me be carrying the Queen's color
on parade is a particular privilege of
course I'll be noticed on the day Sonne
some hairs will stand on end and you
know I'll be very conscious that a lot
of people are watching but I'll also be
conscious that it's not just my moment
but it's very much my company the
Queen's company's moment and the
regiment's moment yes his pride more
than evident given the honor that he's
been accorded today into me Finn's the
colour was last used on the battlefield
more than a hundred years ago in 1881 so
is it fair to ask what its relevance is
to the modern soldier our history is
everything to us and a very short ie
chin higher as a recruiting you know we
go through regimental history with them
so now that they know the depth of the
regiment and of course it's bragging
rights as you mentioned those things
that battle on his arm are all on the
photos Amanda it's the heart of the
regiment it's the the atmosphere changes
you to protect it and everybody knows
what it is and what it's done when you
say everybody here one one would expect
the more experienced officers and
soldiers to fully appreciate that but
what about the younger ones well they as
I've said you might say it's sort of
bred into them from a really early age
so they understand the importance of
and you know that they as I said it's
one of those areas where they will
always sort of talk about and
particularly today they will sort of use
this as they've met go through their
careers and as one of those places where
they can say that was my time that was
my color it's a great moment for them it
is
[Music]
that's good to know
well that's good to know
[Applause]
Oh
oh my girls don't folks
color now moves to the rear of the
escort ready for the March pass to take
place
numbers words of our God
oh my God my God all right ball on the
March core of drums the for me hazel
mere composed by drum H Tom Bart Berkut
just after the Second World War
[Music]
oh my god - boy God will evolve
Oh
Oh mistakes da cunha much number six dog
will move to the right embrace both ways
right
go one more force is slow on quick boys
[Music]
so the trooping has been completed and
the next phase of parade the March fast
is about begin mass bands claim to
neutral slow marches by neutral we mean
they're not tied to any particular
regiment first is called Duke of York
which was adopted by first art in 1805
when the Duke at that time became their
cut
Vince it's worth mentioning that this is
major Neil Stratton's second time as
captain of the escort carry out the role
in 2014 I think with my meeting company
that's correct here yeah it's not that
he did got it wrong the the first time
he was I yeah he was a senior captain
locally promoted or acting major when he
commanded nine completely and and today
you know he is one of the CDA majors in
the regiment's and the premier company
we in the Queen's currently he's a you
know front and center so very unusual
indeed just to underline really for
viewers who may be coming to the parade
for the first time as you say it is
highly unusual given all the roles that
we see the spectrum of responsibilities
it's very unusual to do the same or
twice that's correct yeah I mean you
know a very unique position he's in
today and they're in a lot on him and
the words about the major of the parade
major ed I think who was taking part in
eight previous birthday parades this is
his first on horseback by the way I
think it's worth paying tribute to to
aired as well Vince because this is
quite a difficult role bit of a unsung
hero he would have to know everything to
that they whining off Soviet ice field
mouse on the fried so you know he's the
second one down he's the second in
command sorry something happens he takes
the reins
so to speak and then he was afraid the
same as he would do on the battlefield
he's the senior major the
second-in-command so he's standing by
with all of these words of command
committed to memory as well
that's correct and and had throughout
the rehearsal process he would have had
the opportunity to actually command the
trading people
[Music]
so the s quarter peg to move off led by
field officer ed Brigade waiting for
finding officer today
technically no appears a shield and
fence I think you were a captain with
the mining officer so tell us a little
more about it yeah I mean we both served
together in Afghanistan as Captain she's
been a number of times Afghanistan he's
he's a good guy he's a good bloke and he
stands out you know he's always done
that he come from a very a particularly
strong group of peers of which to those
and I don't think they they would be
sending me saying that he from a very
early age he was pictured you know to
move up and to be where he is today
anything really dirty
well preparing to march past Her Majesty
on the saluting base Prime Minister and
Phillip May the president of Sierra
Leone with the mall so today among the
seven thousand strong crowd in the
stands around Horse Guards Parade lots
of the Prime Minister's colleagues
ministerial colleagues prime minister of
course just stood down as leader of the
Conservative Party but will still be
Prime Minister for the next month or so
[Music]
so as we prepare for the march past I
think it's worth also asking ourselves
for the field officer as if it was
saying someone he knows very well what
would today mean for him well as you
have seen earlier in the program he's
Leddy's Ridgemont on operations and
again a foot guards household division
man on parade today in front of her
Majesty commanding this is the pinnacle
you know he was doing it also
operationally and ceremonially he's done
the whole bag so you know he will feel
very very proud indeed it's the 15th
time that the 1st battalion Grenadier
Guards have had the honor of trooping
their color for the sovereign music
changes to the slow march of the
Grenadier Guards
[Music]
as Her Majesty prepares to acknowledge
the color
[Music]
Queen maintaining a very sharp focus on
what's going on the end sign having
hello at the standard what's known as
the flourish and will then raise it and
what's known as the recover
[Music]
massed ranks of Grenadier Guards
marching proudly past the sovereign and
looking on proudly at no doubt is the
Duke of York
watching his regiment marching past the
Queen myself of course a former colonel
of the Grenadier Guards it's worth
asking at this point about the Dukes
involvement with the regiment Vince what
do we make of it well having taken our
with a physician for his father he's
he's throw himself into the into the
into the tradition as the colonel of the
regiment he he gets involved either the
lower levels I mean he DP visits and
when he does really just at the top and
he works his way to the bottom and he
spends a lot of time with the young
guards and young doctors nurses and and
discusses regimental business with him
and other things at the end of the day
he's just a just a guy he comes as our
friend he comes as our colonel and not a
member of the vol family when he visits
music will change for the arrival of the
Scots Guards
[Music]
number five guard F company scots guards
nicknamed the immortals
following the Battle of fester bird back
in 1915 marching to tune of Garberville
Gaul by General John Reed of the back
watch
[Music]
Coldstream Guards la March host of
guards formed in 1650 the oldest
continuously serving regiment in the
British Army
[Music]
the adjutant of the parade captain Ben
Tracy Warsaw has a brother serving in
the Grenadines
field officer brigade waiting tank LPS
Ashfield riding out to salute the Queen
to indicate that the slow march past has
been completed
the Queen acknowledges
does we enjoy today's parade in nice
sunshine
with all of these bright tunics the
great display of color it's worth
thinking about a century ago the biggest
ever parade dripping the color took part
in Hyde Park 11 units are for God's
paraded then imagine that having just
returned from the Great War look at this
there were so many soldiers there they
weren't enough scarring to news so the
guards to wear their hockey uniform and
this piece of music the soldiers chorus
that we're hearing now was played that
day as the slow march of the guards
machine-gun regiment how things are
changed
so to underline it is of course a
remarkably proud day for those on
program aid but also for the families
and Sonali sharp has been speaking to
some of them I'm with Lady Iona
Mackworth young mother of today's ensign
Sophie Harris is engaged to today's
Sultan and Alex Thatcher he has twins on
parade today now Iona we do have to
start with that photo Robyn becoming
enzyme looks like a childhood dream come
true it is he's always wanted to join
the army and adds a little boy when we
gave him his guards outfit he was so
excited and loved marching up and down
and for years as a child he would go to
sleep listening to military band music
the trooping of the color music was his
nighttime music every night he must be
so proud today Sophie you got engaged to
Robbie just before he deployed to
Afghanistan last year was the timing of
that commitment did it make things
harder or easier I think it definitely
made the goodbyes that bit tougher but
it means so much to all of them go and
you know such an important part of their
job and then to see them all here today
before me there
different capacities what they were
doing a few months ago it's such a
privilege to see in such a special day
to be a part of Alex
twins on parade today I can't imagine
how proud you must be tom it is a
guardsman at the Grenadiers and then you
have been trooper in the lifeguards is
there a bit of healthy rivalry between
the two yes that's always been rivalry
between them since they were born yes
was it inevitable that they both joined
the army they they've always wanted to
and I never doubted they would but today
is a whole new level for us yes thank
you so much for talking to us ladies and
good luck with the wedding some lovely
sentiments being expressed then family
obviously hugely important to the
Grenadier but it's a different dimension
Vince isn't it because the regiment sees
itself very much as a family well it
does we are we are a family regiment and
and we form a bond you know we form a
brotherhood whatever you want to call it
you know we we live eat and breathe
together especially on operations you
know where we look after each other and
we use a buddy buddy system and of
course in barracks is exactly the same
you okay
you look after through the know and you
form that bond and friends you need to
friendship for life
[Music]
the defense secretary since May this
year penny mordant and there we have
senior military figures and we have
president dick just in the top of frame
there the Commissioner of the
Metropolitan Police
[Music]
it's a great sight guards reforming
ready to March fasting foot time a great
style a new change of tempo led by the
Cena time Peter sergeant Neil
Brocklehurst the Scots Guards neutral
quick marches wellington march composed
by sailor does the Queen knows it's been
a very busy week for the Grenadier
Guards and everyone else her majesty
included it's the second inspection for
many of them goes on Monday night Megan
company was inspected by President Trump
and the Prince of Wales during that
state visit of President Trump and the
first lady
[Music]
does the gods navigate this corner
section of horsecar to pray this vast
expanses that involves a challenge yeah
this is probably the most difficult sort
of area because spit in this corner they
would have changed from slow to thick
time so from 65 phases to a hundred and
sixteen paces to the minute and of
course coming to the corner they've got
a change arm so they're in the right
place for when they march faster yeah
it's a difficult corner and as you can
see they've got away with it and it
looks great
more than got away with it's looking
very stylish very energetic music is the
Grenadiers spurred March arranged by
Kathy
[Music]
number three yard approaching Nijmegen
company Grenadier Guards
Queen accompanied on the saluting base
by the Duke of Kent who's Colonel of the
Scots Guards
before guard income and company
Grenadier Guards originally part of the
third Battalion which no longer runs
music soon to change to the Scots Guards
quick march
[Music]
Familia tune of hill and laddie they
could march in the Scots Guards browsing
to you
and the five guard provided by a company
scots guards
[Music]
the role of number six guards dating by
the same company Colstrip guards
regiment has served in every major
conflict of the past 350 years
Equipe marches mill Anala
[Music]
by the way if you're just looking at all
the guards and wondering how you
recognize them we have posted a guide to
recognizing all five of the guards
regiments on our Twitter and Instagram
feeds look for the account BBC Studios
live and you find it there so the mass
bands paying the neutral quick march the
liberators and this is being played in
tribute to those who took part in the
Normandy landings the 75th anniversary
of which was marked earlier this week in
Portsmouth hunted by a queen of course
attending that event in Portsmouth
commanding officer having signaled that
the March varsity QuickTime is now
completed
[Music]
does the guards reform for the next
stage of the parade a moment's respite
for the commanding officer Lieutenant
Colonel P is a shield honestly it's a
massive privilege and a huge honor most
importantly it's a great opportunity for
all of the troops to show off their
medals on their tunics in front of their
family and friends my sons sort of
asking you know am I going to be the red
soldier or the green soldier every time
I step out the door which is nice
interestingly enough I have a picture
here of me when I think I was aged aged
five and done there with my brother my
son now has that very same fancy dress
outfit it's a little bit big for him at
the moment they hope he'll grow into it
and I'd probably say it's a bit of a
warning to all the parents whose
children have a fancy dress tunic and
bearskin that you know fast forward 25
years you never know where where that
small gesture may well lead you well
it's a bit of a warning but it's a
source of pride to Vince it is yeah I
know as a family man and everything else
it'll he should have plays that part
really well so you know he bonds with it
all the way through
he's his wife and children get involved
with the regiment and a great place so
we have the guards almost at the end of
their intensive phase of marching for a
while
is there relief at this point there is a
slight relief better you know they've
got to remain alert and sharp
to what's going on you know underneath
those tunics regardless of what you feel
of the weather today they'll be soaking
wet with sweat so they'll be dehydrated
they'll be breathing heavy you know
there's dust in the air from from
about to get worse with all the cavalry
so yeah it's a it's a difficult moment
to stay sharp stage which time - Chris
let's do a job to do well they're
looking good yeah they're looking great
[Music]
holidays take both quick march
Gold you know fedora left and right
dress wristbands
boomer direct write 10 verse bad waiter
trick much
so the foot cards having reformed and
soon it'll be the turn of the mounted
troops to pass the saluting base ISIL
cavalry Kings troops are on artillery
and the mounted bands of the house whole
division so the mass bands therefore
marching to one side to clear a path for
the motor pants
[Music]
so we have the band of the household
cavalry moving on to Horse Guards Parade
led by the director music major Justin
Matthews
[Music]
companied bye
mercury and Perseus who like all the
drum horses of the house cavalry hold
the rank of Major and they are the
property of the Queen and today by Lance
Corporal a Kiley and Lance Corporal of
Oz Richard Brown
[Music]
and the majestic arrival of the Kings
trooper or horse artillery it's the 22nd
year that the Kings troop has been on
parade five officers 58 mounted troops
76 horses and six guns part of the
birthday parade today
they've given the name the king's truth
by King George the sixth and his
daughter the Queen requested that they
should keep that name in memory of her
former regiment this our major is $1 one
Daniel Fox who joined the army 21 years
ago
the son is a gunner with the Avanti
[Music]
music being played is the rollator is
slow march posed by Duchess against the
mother of Queen Victoria watched very
closely by the Queen because the lead
gun of the Kings truth is in effect that
color so it's accorded the same
relevance as the guards car these 13
pounded put fire guns that we see are
over a hundred years old and one of them
is reported to be firing in the first
rounds of a key at the Somme over a
century
[Music]
music changes to be regimented slow the
lifeguards
what a magnificent sight sovereigns
escort
knowledged by the wrong kernels and by
homage to the Queen led by the field
officer of the sovereigns escort
followed by the escort commander field
officer Tom second riding to the second
time the Queen's birthday parade
standard having been lowered by the
standard bearer of major Douglas
Thompson
two divisions of the Blues and Royals
regimental slow March called the Blues
and Royals now short covering course
consisting of two regiments the blue
bars are the Life Guards and this year
in Sea Life Guards as we know having the
honor of riding in front please and
Royals following the third and fourth
divisions the two senior regiments of
the British Armed Service captain is
Captain Robert Pereira riding Oscar and
the farriers with their glinting axes
historically the ones who would dispatch
horses in Geneva
[Music]
music changing to the tune of the Royals
goes by Blankenburg is the King's Troop
hasil cavalry make their way down side
past the guards memorial field offices
trumpeter trooper Daniel Stokes of the
Life Guards this is trooper Stokes his
second birthday parade his first as
trumpeter signaling the neutral trod the
Horse Guards trot trumpeter
traditionally riding next to the
commanding officer always on a gray
horse which could be seen more easily on
the battlefield among a sea of black
horses
[Music]
so determining Stroup again the truck
passed the saluting base and it does
surprise people Vince but we remind them
every year that the involvement in the
Kings movie is not some kind of ancient
tradition no no not at all I mean it
makes it makes now yeah very recently
the last decade of the Impala paper I
would just say that you know this brings
the whole thing together so you know
you've got the artillery the guns
you've got the cavalry tanks and you've
got the infantry Foot Guards so it all
makes the battle so you know if you look
at the way the battlefield is formed
this is it and does this is going on all
this activity all this color or this
energy just a word about the soldiers
who are standing and waiting patiently
yeah well they haven't got a choice so
we have about that value there but
they'll be asking maybe thinking you
know ride a bit faster so we can get off
but there's still a lot to do so you
know remaining alert is important Kings
true based at Woollett 75 horses operate
today all of them color graded from like
beta black when the horses are named and
given the same initial letters the
quality officer so many of the horses
created today of names beginning with W
the major ones
[Music]
Majesty now acknowledging the color of
the lifeguards which remains at the
carry during the trot Basti lifeguards
tracing their history back to the court
of the Exile charles ii but musics
always been important to the regiment we
spoke earlier Vince about the bugle
calls and again it's worth reminding
people that the use of the bugle is not
redundant no no most of the regiment you
see today will use the bugle for
different parts of the day saw the daily
routine so for instance in reveille that
the bugler had got off early then
everyone else he would have blown his
bugle - for the reveille and then that
means get out of bed and then throughout
the day there will be a dinner call you
know there's even a call for you know
drop everything can falls on duty to
report to the office you know so the
last thing that night you know got a bit
director of music major justin matthews
leading the band of the hustle cavalry
as they pay their tribute to the Queen
on her official birthday cattle drummers
riding the drum horses crossing their
sticks in their individual salutes to
Her Majesty the Queen these musicians
wearing the state coat which signals
that they are members of the royal
household the crimson velvet the gold
braid the lace it's a great sight
it's the oldest ceremonial uniform in
the regular army and it has remained
virtually unchanged since 1685 because
we watch the mounted band Vince I think
it's worth paying tribute as well to the
fact that they are undertaking several
challenges at once well yes I mean they
would have gone through basic training
the same as everyone else but then they
would have done the training at Nana
hall to their musical ability and and to
be you know posted to the household
cavalry bandy is something that is quite
special and they would have have to gone
through six months of her training
riding training to get to this point so
the band of the hostile cavalry horse
the director of music of turning woods
signaling that he's handing back control
to the field officer for the final
birthday salute
salut tweezers
[Music]
Oh
goes in Kultura left and right dress
the guards take their dressing this time
all the guards one long line and just
lets pay tribute to the fact that this
precise move is accomplished with no
word of command begin
God woofle three Rex
Oh God we're done oh boy divisions right
gold quick thoughts
toon is the adjutant posed by drum major
tom Birgit guards clothes up to reduce
the length of the procession along the
MAL as they all return to Buckingham
Palace
[Music]
Oh God
on the edge goes well for clothes cold
when I know I left quick march corner
drums playing crushers glory those by
gottfried teeth cup this is the moment
where the taste stick will be returned
to the regiment's our major Warrant
Officer wants and Brooks by the oddity
guards Monday Ami
[Music]
go and the left guide of the escort
color sergeant
Kemal Richards moving up to the right
there too so that all the guards can see
him clearly and when he drops his arm
it's the eyes forward to signal to all
six guards
and making his way to the approach road
as we near the end of the parade is
garrison son major won't officer class
one Andrew Stokes it's his fourth
birthday parade and it's worth just
underlining the immense role that the
Garrison's art major plays in today's
parade wins well today's variety is all
orchestrated by him and Sam Brooks would
have taken his battalion and regiment
and every else through but it would have
been burned that would have been the guy
who puts everything together to make it
where it is today his qualities well you
know I know him well he's a he's a he's
a good guy and again he's one of these
guys who people might not know that he's
actually a major in the army and he's
the government's art major over London
district he's he's got those sort of
qualities where he stands out field
officer asking her Majesty's permission
to march off to conclude this birthday
parade of 2019
you might eat your god deformed up
waiting to be Michael
field officer in brigade waiting are
being completed most of his duties now
on this parade
in 2019 and so far Vince can be pretty
please lived I think how things calm
extremely well I think that everyone on
tried it on a fabulous job and and even
looking at them now you know they are
steady they're ready to go and you know
that they'll be there all the white the
end garrison sergeant major signaling
that all is ready for the Queen's
procession to leave the parade ground
you mentioned that you that you know
Andrew or Vern as he's known a little
bird says you taught him all he knows is
that true well I told him some of the
things he not I wouldn't say I taught
him everything he taught op soldier and
he's special selected are how is the the
well he's instructor for the late entry
officers course when he was selected for
a commission they have to go through a
course and he came through he was an
actual in student and you know it's no
surprise that he takes all the glory
today well he said an exceptionally busy
week with the state visit and the events
in Portsmouth and of course leading up
now to the Queen's birthday parade and
the success of the week lots of it has
to go down to him Julie well it does as
everyone will know you know there was a
tunic there was there were silos there
was a man and you know he orchestrate he
did the the majority of all of that and
he did it really well and you know
everybody should congratulate you for
that great scene on Horse Guards Parade
as the queen prepares to leave the
parade ground
those royal guests who were in the Duke
of Wellington's old office
have now left the building and they are
making their way back to the palace
already ready for that little reception
that takes place before the appearance
on the balcony a little later on they'll
be looking forward to the the party
surely but also the great birthday fly
passed by there all air force that that
will be a highlight for lots of these
people waiting in the park it's a great
spectacle to end the dipping
[Music]
the March off music very appropriately
is a to called
aroma another reference of course to DJ
because that was the little ports where
British troops landed on the beach the
beach Conan Gold one of the five landing
beaches of the Normandy invasion that
we've spoken a lot about this week the
Grenadier Guards heavily involved with
the Battle of Normandy most notably
operation good words just weeks after
d-day took place
one of the biggest tank paddlers of the
Second World War so that heritage that
tradition and the pride in that's very
much alive today Vince
yes it is I mean there as I said history
is that he's at one of the main factors
and one of our great recruiting and you
know parts of what we do so you know
heat ones through the entire regiment
and as you can see they you know they're
here today and they're showing off and
doing looking large and being nutty
well her majesty's enjoying the sunshine
and it didn't look like a sunny morning
i have to say when we turned up a little
earlier but it's been really pretty
perfect in terms of conditions for
everyone on parade today
with this rosy music let's have your
honest verdict on the parade limits well
I would say the goodest the grantee is
trimming the column and he was an
excellent array then you won't get
better than that is that holy objective
do you think yes so what happens now of
course is that the the Queen and other
members of our family and senior
officers including the MH general and
others will return to the palace and
without giving too many secrets away
Vince I think that's the time when some
conversations I had about the parade and
the Queen if she does have something to
say good or bad she'll she'll express
herself oh definitely yeah in the past
I've heard that the commanding officers
have gone there and indeed peers will
will have the chance to meet her majesty
and other members of the royal family
straighter after this parade you know
and if something has gone gone wrong or
something is something different she
would have noticed that and she's she's
on the money she will tell you the way
it is and she will pick you up at you on
the back of the sign in the same way so
you know as I said before she's got an
eye for detail and that's where she lets
you know
[Music]
would be magnificent site of the house
of cavalry news Royals this brings a
formal end to the Queen's Birthday
parade on horse carts but the
celebrations continue and later the
Kings troop will be riding into Green
Park and firing a 41 gun salute after
which the royal family will appear on
that famous balcony to watch the
traditional birthday fly passed by the
royal air force on this tradition by the
way of the monarch leading the guards
back to Buckingham Palace was
established by George v back in 1914
because the parade at that point had
become so popular it was decided to
provide an even more impressive
experience for the thousands of
spectators and no one here today would
quibble with that because there are many
thousands of spectators gathered in
central London for one of the big events
in the Royal and ceremonial calendar and
indeed the monarch leading the troops
back towards Buckingham Palace is one of
the great sights of the day and as the
carriages make their way along the MAL
they'll pass the street liners of the
Welsh Guards who've been on to me all
week about mentioning the fact that they
too are providing a very important
service today so let's hear it for the
Welsh Guards who've done a sterling job
standing patiently in place since before
the procession began and let's face it
Vince it's an exhausting job well it is
I thought there there there before
anyone else there they own some heroes
there look before anybody else there
that before he else and they're the last
ones back into the barracks so if
they've got a job to do you know that
intermingled as you as you will see
along the the line lining the ruse with
the Metropolitan Police who we work
closely with within London district but
they've got a job to do they'll be
looking that the other side of the road
to ensure that if there's anything going
wrong they they can bring the notice of
the policeman to that particular issue
and just wondering how was the Queen
watches very carefully what's going on
how the street liners keep their energy
levels up and you know we've discussed
earlier about the kind of feat of
endurance that's involved not least on
the parade ground
so how did the street liners do it well
there is a there is areas of patrolling
which they're allowed to do once the
presenters have gone past but it's a
long Stan
for those guys so what we do is there's
a little trick where we issue them
barley sugars and they press that barley
sugar between the belt and the tunic and
of course they have to get people's
attention to you know take it out of the
belt somebody remember the public maybe
Orson Johns Ambulance or even a
policeman you know unwrap stir sweet and
pops it into the guards both very neatly
done so as we follow the royal carriage
procession back to the palace I'm
delighted to say that we've been joined
again by the author and commentator
Robert Hartman who writes for the Daily
Mail and the broadcaster and Sunday
Times journalist Roy anika to both of
you a very warm welcome thank you very
much coming morning Robert is a seasoned
observer I'm just wondering what is your
verdict so far on the 2019 parade why
here is ever a magnificent sight and
underlining once again that profound
bond between the monarch and the
monarchy and and the armed forces at the
end of a week when that ready has come
to the fore both with the state visit of
the president the United States where a
lot of echoes of the great transatlantic
alliance the Second World War we heard a
lot of those in the speeches and then
those very moving intensely moving
anniversary commemorations of the 75th
anniversary of d-day with the Queen
absolutely at their heart
earlier in the week again quoting her
father you know those veterans they were
there they were the they were the king's
men fighting for king and country and
here was the Queen today the only head
of state in the world who served in
uniform in the Second World War there
she was speaking not just on behalf of
Britain but as she said on behalf of the
entire free world thanking them and here
now there she is at the heart of all of
her troops and I think it just goes a
long way to illustrating that historic
bond I've been struck Robert in the past
few days by how many people have come
along and said that they listened to
every single word her Majesty offered in
Portsmouth in a very short address but
that every word packed a punch it did I
think she'd given it a lot of thought it
was it was a very touching moment as
well where she was in a sort of sealed
off VIP area with the veterans and the
world leaders and she she began her
speech and she talked about the
resilience of the of the VD generation
saying that at the 60th anniversary
who'd have thought they'd be here at the
75th but here they are which was great
roar from the crowd you could hear in
the distance and I think there is this
real sense of that the Queen represents
so much more than it's not just the
crown it says who she's she is a living
link with with what many would call the
greatest generation in our history and I
think these were immensely touched by
her words there was a a notable air of
surprise when we had to repeat that the
Queen was 13 already 13 when the second
world war broke out so that's that's the
link isn't it it is and and and she was
in uniform she became good colonel at
the Grenadier Guards so we've seen today
in the middle of the war and her 16th
birthday it was her first military
appointment means an awful lot to her
and then of course she was serving in
the 80s by the end of the war she lived
through those dark days she remembers
the stresses on her father the king and
they in very dark days after the fall of
France and and that sense of that
redemptive sense of
they're pre assurance but America came
into the war in the run-up to d-day I
think all those all those emotions were
were as true to her as to anyone else
during the sweetest anniversary
definitely was made made a very strong
undercurrent to the the u.s. state visit
and then to see her a Portsmouth meeting
and listening to those those veterans
and looking really animated really
enjoying that splendid service if it's
been a week that she will his room
remember just as much as the veterans
who were there themselves in a very
special week broy it's great to have you
with this what strikes you today I think
the thing to remember about this as well
is it's very much a family Acacia
movement with reflecting on the week
that the the state and ceremonial
elements of the week that the Queen has
had because Rock visit this for her it's
very much a family day and so we haven't
all seen the Dutchess of Sussex back to
work for the first times that's having
baby Archer just over a month ago
joining the Queen and members the royal
family and that just watching that
beautiful psychics will respect a cure
to see the sovereigns escort the
household cavalry accompanying the
greenback to Buckingham Palace as you
imagine only hue they're a couple of
really interesting stories this year
with the household cavalry
trooper Nina Kroger being the first
female trooper to serve with the
household cavalry something that
has been made aware of riding on the
retinue with her in the sovereigns desk
on the way back
also alongside trooper Kruger trooper
Samuel Sullivan whose father Steve
Sullivan survived the IRA bombing in
1982 he is also riding on the retina at
the back and I think something to
reflect on Lieutenant Colonel pani
Williams who is the commanding officer
of the Household Cavalry his first
trooping as commanding officer will be
absolutely thrilled with her here's a
men and women who've done colonel paddy
is awarded the Military Cross for his
service in Afghanistan in Helmand
province and he mounts the key thing
about the house or coverage we're seeing
now they are the operational and
ceremonial regiment so a wonderful day
for them great Co they're all family
we're looking forward to seeing perhaps
a new face on the balcony shortly we
shall see we shall see what transpires
it is a big year for the house of
cavalry and as we mentioned earlier
after 200 years they're leaving their
home in Windsor relocating to Salisbury
claim and to mark the occasion they were
given the freedom of the town and that
was in a parade attended by the princess
royal of forces in the parade today as
Colonel of the Blues and Royals and
Finn's that's an historic moment isn't
it because you know most regiments move
around a lot but now I mean that they've
been very lucky to but you actually know
that they have been in Windsor for for
some years I mean they're three
regiments they used to be a regiment of
heavy tanks in Germany like tanks
armored recce which is still in Windsor
and of course the ceremonial side
you see my politics but yeah I mean for
them each age though they put down roots
you know
family ties as we'll be talking about
families throughout the program you know
it is it Miniver took for them to move
from that area to move elsewhere as part
of the role I'm a dwarf but it is what
it is and so you should be prepared to
of sticks and move and you know a lot of
other regiments as you said have been
making the facet lots of choice queen
fighting alone in the carriage which
reminds us that the Duke of Edinburgh
course having stood down from his public
duties is not attending the parade he'll
be celebrating his 98th birthday on
Monday it's the second year Matiz not
attended me birthday parade of course
having attended for all of those years I
think it's a fair bet Robert that he'll
be watching certainly affair that Hugh's
not only watching probably taking notes
and that's a scary thought
it's certainly a scary thought for those
in charge of this parade there will be a
post-mortem I have no doubt
[Music]
this is the first time that the BBC has
streamed the event around the world it's
on YouTube in a new departure so
reaching a whole new audience there's
been intense interest in it and Roya I
think that reflects the fact that we're
at the kind of time where people like
tradition they like that link with the
past and what happens today and this
display today a very impressive military
display is the kind of British tradition
that still is incredibly popular around
the world absolutely it is and I think
we saw that this week with the state
visit of President Trump we saw the pomp
and pageantry and new British military
doing and it's doing its very best and
those are the conditions at the Queen
really respect and admires and that's
why you have birthday for achievement
kind of is so important to her and to
the whole family observing those
traditions and also the monarchy as he
mentioned earlier that the close links
with the Armed Forces Queen has had to
be ample it's kind of cheap paying her
respect and her thanks to us as well
Robert IVs fair to say that one of the
themes in your book which is called
queen of the world is that it is to do
with the fusion of old and new it's to
do with the way that the royal family is
somehow able to hold on to its its
ancient role if you like in terms of our
history but also blending some modern
elements and that's not an easy balance
to me no it's it's not you and no it's
it's something the Queen has been very
conscious after I terrain and that sense
at you monarchies have to evolve they
have to move with the times or
or they disappear but at the same time
they they must they mustn't get ahead of
the times and and it is a hit is a tough
balance but you know days like today as
you say but although the full kind of be
a tradition that legendary what people
expect to see when they come to Brit
Brit at the same time it's a younger
members of the royal family coming
through it's as you say it's coming into
beats being live-streamed and throughout
the the year we've seen a range of
events from the very traditional ones to
modern birds we've seen you know whether
it's it's it's the Duke of Sussex
organizing his Invictus games as were
some of the new developments that gig of
Cambridge with his work with football
and mental health you see the royal
family they're doing the things that
people expect them to do there we see
all the the family out waiting there to
welcome home Her Majesty as she comes
back to the palace and very much ancient
and modern together
this here taking salute at the center
gates police sergeant ray Wrigley served
at the least over 30 years along with
his colleague PCE and Davy within today
they'll be retiring this year so a
lovely day for them to remember
[Music]
does the royal family looks on here the
Wessex in the center then the Duchess of
Cornwall it's worth reflecting on the
fact that those taking salute are ready
for the changing of the guard in
Buckingham Palace which of course is a
daily event but as we'll see a little
later of the special this year because
the Queen's color squadron of the Royal
Air Force has been marching the guard
for the past 24 hours the first time
they've done so on the Queen's birthday
parade in itself before the Grenadier
Guards take over today as they do in
tradition the escort will mount God
after the train itself and that's a duty
that lots of people don't realize exists
base the fact that the work is not
completed I mean these these guys would
have would have been up there you know
6:30 you know some before that and
they've got all the way through this
parade you know that the that's not only
the physical but the mental aspect of
doing something in this sort of area
this magnitude of a parade when it comes
to the end of the parade the guys will
then mount God above the palace and
carry out their duties them to what
we're all used
so the Queen has returned home back at
Buckingham Palace watched by many
members of the royal family on that
balcony in a short while
Her Majesty will join them ready for the
traditional birthday fly past and
thousands of spectators enjoying the
proceedings already others making their
way along the mound to gather in front
of the palace to enjoy that spectacle
too so plenty of expectation there and
having attended the parade since he was
very young the Duke of York has now
completed his second birthday parade as
Colonel of the Grenadier Guards it's a
good moment for us to catch up with him
I spoke to him just a few days ago
during the preparations for today's
event your old honey is good to talk to
you good morning can I test your memory
a little to start yes let's have your
earliest recollection of the birthday
parade oh I must have been I suppose
about five or six watching it all unfold
from the window if I came Palace and
then took and stand on the balcony and
and see everybody coming back
those are my earliest memories of the
troupe how was your perception of the
event changed over the years it's
interesting because as a child one looks
at it is all frightfully exciting as
lots of red tunics bear skins old guard
a new guard or on parade together until
it is over and then having the role of
colonel Grenadier Guards thrust upon you
I have a completely different
appreciation of the effort that
everybody puts in not only for their own
part in the parade but it's the number
of different pieces that fit together
can we talk about the role of colonel of
the Grenadier Guards because there's a
very rich heritage to the role and
indeed you're following in the footsteps
of the Queen and the Duke of Edinburgh
I don't remember my mother being the
colonel and I learnt a lot from what my
father has been doing as colonel but you
put your own little twist on it and so
what I've been working at is getting to
know everybody
remember that these are household troops
these are the people that are the
closest to the monarch and the Queen's
company is the Queen's bodyguard
we have been speaking to quite a few the
guardsmen and they all say the same
thing really which is that they're
impressed by the level of your
involvement and your commitment to the
role I come from a service background
some like I understand how important it
is to be able to work with where your
men and if you had a ship because I've
had you understand what they expect of
you it's about making everybody realize
that we are all of one company I happen
to be a member the royal family but I've
been there done it seen it and it's a
great privilege as it were to be there
whatever describe a ceremonial head I am
constantly amazed by the reports that I
get from around the world about how the
Grenadier is actually perform as a team
I am extremely proud to be your colonel
and I look forward to seeing many of you
as the next couple of years goes by
[Music]
given that the Grenadier Guards are
providing the escort taking center stage
that adds a different dimension again to
this year's parade for you yes somebody
will be with note pads and pens are
always are in those against oh yeah when
he's done that wrong or oh that was good
but I'm looking forward to seeing as it
would have my soldiers on parade doing
what I can only describe as an
absolutely outstanding job what is it in
your view that explains the enduring
popularity of the print
we're very good at pomp and circumstance
but there's so much more that underlies
all these various parades and we have
but just a small cog in a very large
machine that is the United Kingdom and
what it stands for is it possible for
you to enjoy fully enjoy the parade in
this role given yes that you've got I've
got to think about quite a few things I
know you enjoy it there's a sort of half
a brain that is working on what's he
going to be doing underneath you and you
particularly enjoy it when you haven't
fallen off and you've got yourself back
inside the gates or through the archway
of Buckingham Palace that's the moment
you can get it was last year all right
this is only the second time I've done
it so it's going to be an interesting
experience you're all highness we wish
you well enjoy thank you thank you thank
you yes that was the Duke of York
describing his involvement with the
regiment preparations for today's parade
and so to hear about the relationship
from the perspective of the Grenadier
Guards sonali spoke to their regimental
attend colonel before this morning's
parade took place
major-general Rolly Walker you work very
closely with the Duke of York in his
role as Colonel of the Grenadier it
sounds like he's thrown himself right in
we're about a year into his Colonel C
and I am amazed by how much time he's
given up to spend time with us so he's
been really engaged and active colonel
do you think his military background has
helped that transition into that role I
think it's a huge part of it there's
instant empathy with with our soldiers
granny has been on operations this last
year he knows exactly what they're going
through what their families have been
going through and they can look at him
and see someone and realize we're all of
one company so there's that mutual
respect what did the Grenadier say to
you about him
I think they're very pleased because
he's so visible he's made a real effort
to get to know them he's entertained
them of all ranks some of our retired
veterans as well as the most junior ones
so they all know him which is which is a
large part of being the Canon
over the past couple of hours we've had
a lot about the importance of family in
the regiment and of course the Duke of
York is taking on a role that both his
mother and father have had has that
helped I think he's got expert advice
from two former Colonels and I think it
means a huge amount to us that they've
kept it in the family now you yourself
nine years ago led the parade how proud
are you of the regiment today very I'm
relieved that I'm not doing it again but
no it's a huge day and I know the
commanding officer has put a lot of
effort into getting this ready and like
nine years ago they've just returned
from operations and therefore there
couldn't be a more fitting way to
showcase they returned back to these
shores thank you so much for your
insight today very much thank you very
much indeed
back at buckingham palace with a match
to the Queen having returned and the
royal family now having left the balcony
there in the rooms there to enjoy a bit
of a reception before the fly past takes
place and we have the changing of the
guard in the forecourt then we have the
Grenadier Guards taking over from the
Queen's color squadron of the Royal Air
Force
having finished the iterate let's take
our positions right away and stay on
guard until tomorrow
and standing prominently to attention in
the great art raid the center of
Buckingham Palace to symbolize this
handover of the guard today
Modelling officers respectively of the
Queen's color squadron and the Grenadier
Guards the first time that the Queen's
color squadron of the Royal Air Force
has been on guard duty on the day of the
birthday parade they have of course
behind a guard many times over the years
but it's the first time that it's
coincided with the birthday parade and
their commanding officer today been Oh
does we see the
ceremony taking place which is very
familiar to lots of people who turn up
in the morning at Buckingham Palace
during the year for one of the main
features of London life it's worth
underlining again Robert really that
military service is something that the
Queen places such importance on she does
indeed here it's it's it's often said
the Windsors really are the ultimate
force his family the Queen is the
daughter of a Royal Navy officer married
to one have children grandchildren have
been in the Armed Forces and I think
when you sort of spend pretty much every
day of your life with someone in uniform
often even at the breakfast table
following you everywhere
your life frequently involves events
involving all the Armed Forces it's just
it's it becomes second nature and it's
incredibly important to her and it
matters a great deal to the Armed Forces
going back to the veterans we spoke to
this week they all of them talked about
that their pride in the Queen and the
crown and today's servicemen and women
all pay tribute to the importance of
that bond changing of the guard taking
place in lovely sunny weather which
reminds us that the conditions can often
be a challenge for members of the Armed
Forces on a day lighted in me what can
often be a sweltering day some 2,000
soldiers on parade and some 300 horses -
as we saw thousands of members of the
public of course gathering in st.
James's Park and around Horse Guards and
Buckingham Palace and looking after them
is very much a full-time job so we spoke
to three individuals each of whom plays
a different part in ensuring their
welfare and well-being on the day
my name's tiny icing and I am the
tactical commander for the event of
trooping the colour of 2019 on behalf of
John Ambulance our job here today is
provide medical cover for the public the
military and I'm a police in this
particular area my name is major O'Hara
Telfer I'm the regimental veterinary
officer for the house of cavalry mounted
regiment and I'm responsible for their
health and welfare throughout the parade
my name is major in Parsons I'm a
cardiology doctor monitoring the guards
at the Queen's birthday parade to try
and find out why some soldiers are more
susceptible to fainting than others and
what we can do to prevent it from
happening in certain stresses that tend
to make it worse are heat and standing
upright for a blonde period of time
which is very relevant in terms of the
Queen's birthday parade and I think if
we put my guys in that situation we have
to do whatever we can to be able to make
life easier for them no one quite knows
why the fainting reflex happens we think
it's probably just a brain preservation
thing it just hits the brakes turns
everything off and then down you go so
it's not weakness on your part it's just
what it is we are working on something
at the moment and the Queen's birthday
bro it might be a really good way to
test that in sort of field research so
feel research is always better research
because it's much more true to life
event control event control from silver
they just gotta just confirm that a
Foxtrot units are now on the parade
grounds
it's a well-planned event so it means
that the casualties are quite few from a
patient point of view it's Lister's
carts grazes people that were owned well
in the morning but didn't want to miss
the event so they come down and they
need our assistance the right Jones good
tips reporter it's a good weather even
though it's quite warm we can't assume
that's just the weather there could be
an underlying issue there and that's
what we will check out is 120 houses a
little high syndra ambulance is there
for the members of public but it's a
senior officer request urgent medical
assistance then all members are allowed
to attend the parade ground itself we're
here to make sure that people go home
the whole point of being here is only if
something goes wrong if we do we want to
provide a quick and safe service for
those people
[Music]
whenever our horses go out for a state
occasion we would always take out the
veterinary ambulance
we very much prepare for the worst and
thankfully have never touch with seen it
if a horse were to go lame on the parade
then our priority is that horses welfare
we will take it to one side take all its
tack off cool it down give it a drink if
it is a severe emergency then at that
point the veterinary team will leave the
parade and return the horse to barracks
just trying to build up a bit of a
picture you need to see at what point
you're afraid people faint who's more at
risk we've got a good idea who we think
will be so have you Casey down the rank
what you might see something soul just
sway about before is no that's not
something that ought and has the effect
I've been improving their blood supply
from their veins back up to the right
side of the hop it's one there you can
just see with mclees way backwards and
forwards like this it's quite subtle the
medics here at the standby he obviously
seen something sparked their attention
so just how long the baton fainted
they're what they're trying to do is get
him over to the main ambulance point and
getting cooled down back on his feet and
he'll be right as rain in a couple
minutes
[Music]
this year we adopt some conservative
measures tradition all his previously
was like they do physical training in
the morning that has the effect of
decreasing their blood pressure and so I
can put the garden more risks water
directed the soldiers to increase their
salt intake we may actually help before
and after picture to see if any of those
are good effect having raced up the MAL
I'm pleased to say that major parsons
has joined me fresh from the parade
ground now we saw you in the film taking
lots of precautions against fainting did
they work today yeah absolutely no faint
is today on parade which I'm very
pleased to say can't take all the credit
because I think it was a bit of a nicer
well the weather was certainly less hot
than the previous couple of rehearsals
so yeah but everything seems to work
well we essentially asked the guys to
salt load as of Monday and try to get
them acclimated as much to be kid to the
heat as we know thermal stress is a big
thing in making people faint and that
you know peers on the job what it does
is it increases the plasma volume is the
amount of water in the blood and that
just means that you can stand up for
longer it's a little bit of a trick to
hide behind rate you you also just try
to sort of understand some of the old
wives tales passed down through the
generations to try and work out what's
useful and what's not useful wicking
toes eating sweets that's nothing could
you give us any tips on what's not so
not useful well the big breakfast I mean
it was always a thing that soldiers
marched on my stomach
actually a big feed we think probably
diverts all that blood flow to the gut
and then you've not got it all beating
out through the heart so we try and just
try and work with their commanders to be
able to support the guys as much again
and one key thing about your research is
that it may help operational duties in
the future
yeah we certainly hope so so I mean it's
two extremes of soldiering in a way
you've got the ceremonial stuff then
you've got the operational and stuff but
in a way if you swap the bearskin for a
helmet swap the tunic for a body arm and
the physiological stresses are very
similar and we hope as we move forward
with ways to sort of be able to support
the plasma volume now the stuff that
we're working on it's worth
fainting will be useful operations
points so one of the main reasons people
coming into the hostel when I was
deployed in Afghanistan was because of
fainting well all the best through the
research major partners thank you very
much thank you very much just a sense of
the pride and the excitement of the day
itself and look at that great sight vast
crowd making its way along the mall down
towards Buckingham Palace with the Queen
Victoria Memorial glinting in the
sunshine and it's turned out to be a
lovely day have to say very soon we'll
be in Green Park just to the left of the
image there we'll see the Kings troops
moving into Green Park for the 41 gun
salute why 41 well there's a 21 gun
salute for the Queen's official birthday
and then they add another 20 gun salute
because it's taking place in a Royal
Park so the crowds here will hear it
very very clearly a 41 gun salute in
neighboring green talk which will fill
the year skies with sound around
Buckingham Palace it'll be heard all
through central London because of course
the Kings troops fire their guns on all
important events ceremonial events
including the Queen's actual birthday on
the 21st of April we were explaining
earlier that today is the official
birthday a tradition that was restarted
by Edward the seventh
one hundred years ago just over a
hundred years ago this tradition of
organizing the official birthday on a
day like today there's no better example
really of the reason for the official
birthday in June
especially for those monarchs who
suffered a birthday in the depths of
winter as lots of them did so June
seemed a better option than November and
there you have the the movement of
people it's a great flow a great sea of
people moving around towards the front
gates and the main carriage gates of
Buckingham Palace ready for the fly past
itself and we caught a glimpse there the
Kings troops making their way into
Greenland and riah I just think it's
worth at this point
noting the Kings troop contribution is
to a day like today because we were
saying earlier it's a relatively recent
addition in 1978 but by now they've
earned their place as a pretty
irreplaceable part of the parade
absolutely and those incredible wheat
that we can hear the rumbling in the
background yes the gum salute they've
been such an important part of today and
and all week actually we saw and heard
the amazing gun salutes for the state
with President Trump state visit earlier
in this week and they are something they
are one of those sights and spectacles
that everyone really looks forward to
seeing and hearing on the day it's such
an extraordinary sight and sound the
King Street War Horse Artillery you know
so many of them very well and I'm just
wondering what is their attitude to
taking part in events like this well
I've been lucky enough to spend much
more time here with the household
category and the household cavalry and
for them it is such an honor to take
part they are of course the most senior
Regiment in the army the Queen's
Monarchs personal guard it's a very
proud day for all of them and as I
mentioned earlier on the key thing to
remember about the house recovery which
you can sometimes forget on days like
this which is all about ceremony is that
they are part of the house of division
they are the only operational and
mounted ceremony regiment in the world
these are men and women
you have served and will serve on
operations abroad they are fully trained
in reconnaissance and tanks of course
they're all moving shortly from Windsor
to bull furred on the armoured side say
for the household cavalry it's a very
important reminder of their connection
with the Queen but also the dual role
which they hold well one of the
traditional birthday celebrations is the
announcement of the new Honours List of
course among them we have Warrant
Officer only Hut who gets the
meritorious service medal today mention
of Li because he plays a crucial role in
organising the birthday parade and
dimension to to our friend David Cole
who's the director music of the Royal
British Legion but lots of other
deserving recipients of awards as well
today congratulations to all of them and
sonali's been joined by guest who has a
special reason to celebrate today that's
right look who has a very big smile on
her face
today I'm with the BBC's Culture Arts an
entertainment correspondent Brenda
amana's who has won been awarded an OBE
for services to broadcasting and
diversity when did you find out
congratulation I found out I think it's
approximately a month ago now so I've
had to keep a secret till then which has
been the hardest thing ever and who was
the first person you told it had to be
my mom my mom and the look on her face I
think was worth it all I mean that's
what it was all about for me really they
my mom's obviously postman Tasha
generation they came here so for eight
had better themselves and for better for
us so to be able to say hey Gayle look
what I've done and to see her response I
know what it means for her and the
validation is important to her so I'm
delighted to be making her happy Bonnie
this morning do you know when you'll be
visiting the palace I don't you know I
don't know a thing about the protocol
from here or I didn't even know what to
do when I got the letter it was a bit of
a shock and it was a formal letter it
was a white land show and it wasn't
brown so I knew it wasn't bad news and
it took a while to get used to it and it
took a while to learn to keep my mouth
shut I'm not saying anything so what
happens next
not sure i think i'm panicking about
what to wear you've been working very
hard outside of your BBC commitments
trying to increase diversity talking so
much about the importance of arts do you
think it will actually just aid your
work I hope it does I really do I mean
I'm passionate about the arts and I'm
passionate about people but community
arts community I think arts at the
trance there's a transformative I think
it's important I think it brings us all
together and to be able to use that to
push my passion for inclusion it's it's
just a gift really I think we all have
our own unique DNA's
we all have something to offer and I
think all we ever want is the
opportunity to do our best and be our
best and that's what it's about for me
that's what diversity and inclusion is
about and to be able to do that's
amazing well many congratulations again
thing all of us thank you in Green Park
King's Troop preparing to fire the first
round
the blood okay commanding officer major
Harry Wallace is the one giving the
orders right the interval between each
round of fires ten seconds each round
counted and marked on a leather pad
Kings troops warring it's important part
in today's celebrations of the Queen's
official birthday we're looking ahead to
the appearance of the royal family on
the balcony of buckingham palace there's
be no last month the royal family
welcomed its youngest member into the
world the birth of the archie harrison
mountbatten-windsor and over the years
we've seen many royal youngsters making
their first appearance on the balcony at
the birthday parade
[Applause]
[Music]
young Bonnie Prince Charlie is a thrill
spectator watching his mother received
the traditional owners of a sovereign
[Music]
the March pastor to panis was barely
over when down came the rain anyway the
tribes ignored the weather they wanted
to see the royal family on the balcony
[Applause]
now of course the crowds are waiting to
see between on the balcony when she
appears to they're loudly expressed in
life she has three months old can't ever
get her his first taste of a life final
public occasion and the moment all the
crowd have been waiting for the Prince
of Wales carrying Prince William
what an amazing sight
you take Harris is the princess and
there our blimp servants George in his
first appearance on this balcony it's
the first time we've seen a sovereign
and three future sovereigns together in
public
[Applause]
the first appearance on that balcony for
Princess Charlotte with the Duchess of
Cambridge
[Music]
the royal standard the immense rose
under fluttering the breeze above
Buckingham Palace telling us that the
queen is in residence as we will find
out in just a moment if there'll be any
first appearances on this balcony but
before we talk about those is also worth
Robert noting that one of the veteran
observers if I can call him that the
Prince of Wales is also in a very
significant year the 50th anniversary of
his investiture as Prince of Wales
indeed you yes and this is a great week
of anniversaries it's important to look
ahead to the end of the month and it
will be 50 years since they're great at
Caernarfon Castle and when he was
invested as Prince of Wales and he'd be
gained back to Wales at the end of the
month um this time not to canal van in
fact but he's going to de-spawn G which
which is also celebrating 50 years it
was 50 years since Swansea was given
city status the prince conferred of
himself after he'd been invested he went
on a tour of Wales went to Swansea in
and made Swansea a city so he's going
back there will be welcomed by charities
from from all over Wales and he will go
Tara wells as indeed he does every
summer I think he's been to llandaff
Cathedral and which I'm sure you know
Hugh well very well fine place and he's
going to visit sir the
home of them think the great the great
Welsh toads could win so it'll be a week
of great Welsh events but yes thinking
back to that extraordinary day in the
summer of 69 in the space of a month you
had three amazing things you had man
landing on the moon you had the first
ever royal documentary and yet you had
this came back this theme of ancient
modern there in the ramparts of
Caernarfon castle you had the Queen
priming her son as Prince of Wales
modeled of course on the great ceremony
invented by David Lloyd George before a
previous Prince of Wales back in 1911
athili right which which in turn had
sort of drawn various influences from
King back too far you watch this was far
better than mine but I think knowing
blurred out her and we are we expecting
any surprises and disappearance I've
just seen some lovely photos of Prince
Louie with Princess Charlotte watching
from behind a curtain watching his
father treat her back down the master I
think we are going to see fingers
crossed Prince Gary make his debut on
that balcony which will be quite lovely
sight
well that will indeed because we've been
looking at term the debuts on the
balcony for lots of royal children over
the years and ages do very so this would
be quite a young appearance it will be
he just celebrated his first birthday
just last month but it will be the same
age roughly as Princess Charlotte and
Prince George made their debut just just
under and over one so lovely lovely the
first time we've seen all three
Cambridge children on the balcony with
some of their cousins and Prince Larry
will be sing wonderful fly pasture it's
pretty old always so enjoys
[Music]
looking up into the sky is where we see
the fly past starting to form
high above the skies over central London
and waiting for the year the Queen to
lead other members they're all family
out onto that famous balcony to greet
the crowds of course and they'll be
delighted with the sight but of course -
and be there in time in good time for
the flight paths to take place I don't
want to miss it up there we can see the
windows opening and her Majesty ready to
[Music]
urghhh relatives a close family onto the
balcony it's out to a great roar of
applause from the crowd below
[Music]
[Applause]
Prince of Wales Colonel of the Welsh
Guards Duke of York as we mentioned
earlier talking to him about his role as
Colonel of the Grenadier Guards and
there we have the new appearance
absolutely princely making his debut on
on Bath me that's a very lovely sight
Duchess of Cambridge just holding him
close and very sweet little outfit which
looks very reminiscent of an outfit that
you could cambridge war when the balcony
when he was little nipper oh look he's
having a good look and he clearly likes
the fly past and he's perfected his
royal wave you jika Cambridge will be
encouraged by that he's spoken of his
hopes the board his children boys and
the girl will be involved in the Armed
Forces one day Prince knew he looks like
he's well on board with that plan
so we have the formation of helicopters
we have a puma piloted by squad leader
liam Glaspie and flight lieutenant
Caryn's it conducted his flight training
alongside Prince William in 2009/10 and
we have the Chinook of course
see the Dutchess of Sussex there again
on the balcony item public for the first
time since today since about the Archie
it's like the Philips children there
have their flying book which they always
ever be a squatting on planes and
helicopters
the BAE 146 regularly used to transport
the royal family of course and senior
government ministers across the world as
well as military commanders on the front
line
in typhoon fgr fours
reaching across the sky towards
Buckingham Palace the royal family
waiting
just be look at the
tighten formation
Lucca Cambridge just pointing out
as they wait for the spectacular phenom
the red arrows streaming red white and
blue as they will do over Buckingham
Palace for this Queens birthday parade
of 2019 and water cite that is
[Applause]
[Music]
not just a great sight but a great sound
as well as they Thunder through the
skies thoroughly enjoyed by her majesty
the royal family will stay on the
balcony for the final royal salute of
this birthday parade
a huge round of applause for the fly
past and the applause joined in there by
the youngest member on the balcony
itself very proudly waving and really
getting into the royal habit pretty
quickly queen Kaylee's enjoyed the
parade today
and acknowledging the cheers of the
crowds
[Applause]
it's very absolutely loving what's going
on very abused lasted
entering the spirit fully I think
absolutely
and so the Queen's birthday parade is
over it's the 67th of Her Majesty's
reign marked by a really great display
of precision and style on horse guards
and the memorable sight of the vast
crowds here at Buckingham Palace
wishing Her Majesty a very happy
birthday don't forget you can enjoy it
all again our highlights program is on
BBC 2 this evening at 7:30 but for now
from my special guest Lieutenant Colonel
Vince gaunt Robert Hardman and Roy Anika
and indeed everyone on the BBC team at
the Queen's Birthday parade thank you
for watching and good bye
you